
Ayodhya (Hindustani: [əˈjoːdʱːjaː] (About this soundlisten); IAST: Ayodhyā) is a city and the administrative headquarters of Faizabad district (officially Ayodhya district) and the Faizabad division (officially Ayodhya division) of Uttar Pradesh, India.[4] 
It shares a municipal corporation with its neighbouring twin city of Faizabad.

The city is identified by some with the legendary city of Ayodhya, and as such, as being the birthplace of Lord Rama and setting of the epic Ramayana. 
The accuracy of this identification is central to the Ayodhya dispute: modern scholars variously believe that the present-day Ayodhya is same as the legendary Ayodhya, or that the legendary 
city is a mythical place that came to be identified with the present-day Ayodhya only during the Gupta period around the 4th–5th century AD.[citation needed]

The present-day city is identified as the location of Saketa, which was an important city of the Kosala mahajanapada in the first millennium BC, and later served as its capital.
[citation needed] The early Buddhist and Jain canonical texts mention that the religious leaders Gautama Buddha and Mahavira visited and lived in the city. 
The Jain texts also describe it as the birthplace of five tirthankaras namely, Rishabhanatha, Ajitanatha, Abhinandananatha, Sumatinath and Anantnath, and associate it with the legendary chakravartins. 
From the Gupta period onwards, several sources mention Ayodhya and Saketa as the name of the same city.

Owing to the belief as the birthplace of Rama, Ayodhya (Awadh) has been regarded as one of the seven most important pilgrimage sites (Saptapuri) for Hindus. 
It is believed that the birth spot of Rama was marked by a temple, which is said to have been demolished by the orders of the Mughal emperor Babur and a disputed mosque erected in its place. 
In 1992, it lead to the demolition of Babri mosque by Hindu mobs with the aim to replace it with a temple of Rama. The Ayodhya dispute concerned activism by Hindu groups to rebuild a grand temple of Rama at the site of Janmabhoomi.
[5] The five judges of the Supreme Court bench heard the title dispute cases from August to October 2019. On 9 November 2019, the Supreme Court, headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi, vacated the previous decision and ruled that the land belonged to the government per tax records. 
It further ordered the land to be handed over to a trust to build the Hindu temple. It also ordered the government to give an alternative 5 acres (2.0 ha) of land to the Uttar Pradesh Sunni Central Waqf Board to build a mosque to replace the demolished Babri Masjid. 
The construction of Ram Mandir commenced in August 2020.[6]
